A little while back, went on a slight obsession with the game 2048. Game premises is simple, where you try grouping number blocks from smaller blocks into larger blocks. The way this game goes for me, is that after a while, I get locked into this semi-weird state of mind where somewhat playing on auto-pilot, but at the same time thinking randomly on how to improve the score.

Some interesting takeaways from this:

1. General strategy does not always match optimal strategy – There was a time when I made up some algorithms, such as never move the largest tile, always choose the move that increases the bottom row, never move in the vertical direction…etc. What happens with these algorithms is that when you follow it strictly, my experience is that you rarely reach the 2048 mark. My most successful results are pretty much always when I follow my general strategy but every once in a while I follow my intuition and choose a move that’s not dictated by my algorithm, but it “just feels right.” While it is totally possible that this is due to my algorithm not being detailed enough, hence the need to have spur of the moment moves that might better reflect the optimal strategy, I personally feel that the optimal strategy is probably too complex to reduce to simple rules that you can just follow. This feeling maps well to my experience in life. For me, I have a general algorithm which I go through my life and it just irks me when I have to deviate, or if I’m not able to go about with my plans. But like 2048, life is probably much too complicated to be able to be boiled down to rules to follow, often, the “just feels right” decisions/choices probably yield better results.

2. Every new tile is exponentially tougher than the previous tile. In short, if you have a tile ‘x’, to get to tile ‘2x’, you have to produce another tile ‘x’ and have it so that the two ‘x’ tiles are within contact of each other. In essence, you are juggling to produce another ‘x’ tile while having less space to maneuver(since one space is already occupied by the first ‘x’) and also making sure that when you actually get the second ‘x’, it isn’t so far away from the first ‘x’ so that you can combine them together. To me, this applies to real life as well. Fortunately(or unfortunately depending on how you view it), many family and friends of my dad’s generation are pretty successful from a career aspect. Now they want/expect this generation to hit the same score or better. I get the feeling of trying to get to ‘2x’ is just much harder compared to ‘x’ that the people with ‘x’ usually doesn’t realize this. Especially the juggling part, which I think people in my generation has the most pressure, where juggling between work and home is much more complex compared with the previous generation(this can go into a separate rant all by itself).

3. As in life, 2048 has an element of chance. You might have everything all nice and organized, but the next number that pops up just destroys your whole setup, and suddenly you go from smooth sailing to panic mode. I’ve learned to keep cool during the game when that happens and just try to make the most of it, definitely should apply that to real life.

Gotta stop playing this game…
